---
title: "The ONE Thing"
date: "2019-01-31"
type: "booknote"
description: "This is some notes for the book, Another Book."
coverImage: "./cover.jpg"
category: "Personal Development"
author: "Gary Keller and Jay Papasan"
book_url: "By narrowing your focus and your actions upon the ONE Thing, your ONE purpose; you can achieve extraodinary results. This is another personal development book in the vein of goal setting, productivity, and life management. It seeks to dispel a lot of common personal development idioms as myths and help the reader remove competing distractions while hyper-focusing their actions and priorities upon well-defined but also extraordinary goals in the multiple areas of their lives."
---

**Some Background**
*I originally caught this book being discussed in a Facebook group that I am a part of. It is the fourth book in the month of January of 2019 and the first that I decided to write a summary of book notes for. Some of the advice in the book may either appear very banal or possibly too abstract for application; the end of the book seeks to summarize the content of the entire book in a manner which makes it easier to apply the principles in your own life. I found the goal-setting principles very interesting and the overall message fairly helpful. It may be more of the same for a lot of readers in this space but it may prove very helpful for those who seem to have difficulty focusing on a specific goal or developing a specific purpose for their life; hence the ONE Thing.*


**The ONE Thing**

**The Surprisingly Simple Truth Behind Extraordinary Results**

**By Gary Keller with Jay Papasan**

**An Introduction to the ONE Thing**

One of the key concepts described in The ONE Thing is the importance of simply focusing on ONE Thing. As stated in the first chapter of the book, "Where I'd had huge success, I had narrowed my concentration to one thing, and where my success varied, my focus had too." Going Small or narrowing your focus to the most important task at hand is the most efficient use of time and ultimately responsible for the difference in productivity and achievement of individuals who share similar hours.

> Going Small is ignoring all the things you could do and doing what you should do. It's recognizing that not all things matter equally and finding the things that matter most....It's realizing that extraordinary results are directly determined by how narrow you can make you focus...You need to be doing fewer things for more effect instead of doing more things with side effects.

The book uses a metaphor of a row of dominoes, where the lead domino at the beginning of the row is representative of the first small and narrow task of a much larger goal. It is effectively the one thing that all actions should be directed toward tipping over (or completing). Once tipped over, there is a sequential chain of actions where each previous tipped domino (or task) makes the subsequent domino or task easier to tip (or complete). The metaphor works because of the potential energy generated by lining up the dominoes can generate enough power for a domino to effectively topple a domino 50% larger than itself.

> The key is over time. Success is built sequentially. It's one thing at a time.

**Examples of Successful Businesses that focused on One Thing:**

-   KFC - Single Secret Chicken Recipe
    
-   Adolph Coors Company grew 1500% with only one product.
    
-   Microprocessors are responsible for the majority of Intel's net revenue
    
-   Starbucks focused primarily on one thing, coffee.
    
-   Google, search, which brought in the revenue from advertising.

Successful companies must determine and focus on what their ONE Thing is and not distribute their focus among-st multiple things simultaneously. However, a company can transition from ONE Thing and then to another ONE Thing. Apple is an example of this, where their ONE Thing changed from Macs to iMacs to iTunes to iPods to iPhone.

**ONE Person can also make the difference in someone's life, examples include:**

-   Walt Disney's ONE Person was his brother Roy who provided him employment opportunities.
    
-   Sam Walton's ONE Person was his brother-in-law who helped him financially.
    
-   Albert Einstein's ONE person was his mentor, Max Talmud.
    
-   Oprah Winfrey's ONE person was her father.

    
>No one succeeds alone. No one.

> Passion for something leads to disproportionate time practicing or working at it. That time spent eventually translates to skill, and when skill improves, results improve. Better results generally lead to more enjoyment, and more passion and more time invested. It can be a virtuous cycle all the way to extraordinary results

The above excerpt from the book seems to conflict with the proposition in Cal Newport's So Good, They Can't Ignore You which argues that passion more-so comes from deliberate practice of a certain skill or hobby rather than passion serving as the starting point in the development of a skill.

To live the ONE Thing, you must learn how to filter the large amount of distracting information and choices and identify the small ONE Thing to focus your attention and efforts upon.

**The Lies**

The book attempts to challenge many common idioms found in business and self-help circles that conflict with the central concept of the ONE Thing.

**Lie No. 1 - Everything Matters Equally**

Believing that all obligations or tasks are equal results in a scattered and often overbooked day where our progress undermines our success. "When everything feels urgent and important, everything seems equal. We become active and busy but this doesn't actually move us any closer to success. Activity is often unrelated to productivity, and busy-ness rarely takes care of business."

This busy-ness/productivity dynamic was very apparent in my life from 2015 to 2017. My days were often crowded with busy tasks that soaked up available time and left a feeling of productivity without any substantial progress toward anything meaningful. I had settled into a routine that only satisfied me on a superficial level.

To-do lists are tyrannical in the sense that they often crowd our lives with trivial tasks that demand and compete for our attention to complete. "The things that are the most important often don't scream the loudest." Achievers have the ability to separate the essential derive priority from the collection of tasks that invade our minds daily.

Replace a to-do list with a success list, which is a list that aims you in a specific goal oriented direction rather than crowding you with multiple competing requests.

To hammer home the idea that not everything matters equally, the books introduces the commonly cited Pareto's Principle, that asserts that a minority of causes, inputs, and efforts is responsible for the majority of the results (hence 20% of the work is responsible for 80% of the results).

> The majority of what you want will come from the minority of what you do. Extraordinary results are created by fewer actions than most realize.

This returns back to the notion of going small and focusing on what produces the most results. Filtering your to-do list of "Could-do's" and "Should do's" into a success list of simply "should do's". In the book's opinion, to get to the ONE Thing, you must push the Pareto Principle further: 20% of the 20% of the 20% until you eventually get to the ONE Thing. After asking "What Matters", continue asking until you reach only one thing.

Learn to say "No" to additional tasks or demands that can pull your focus away from the ONE Thing. Avoid simply checking off tasks on a to-do list that eventually end with nothing substantial.

> Doing the most important thing is always the most important thing.

**Lie No. 2 - Multitasking**

> Multitasking is merely the opportunity to screw up more than one thing at a time.

A research project in 2009 found that self-described "high multitaskers" performed worse than self-described "low multitaskers" on the problem subset described by the project.

> It's not that we have too little time to do all things we need to do, it's that we feel the needs to do too many things in the time we have.

Humans are able to effectively balance low-effort tasks, however anything that requires a moderate or non-trivial amount of effort can not be efficiently balanced and handled. There is also a tremendous amount of productivity loss during the context switch while switching between non-trivial work.

> It's not that we have too little time to do all the things we need to do. It's that we feel the need to do too many things in the time we have.

When you're actually accomplishing two things at once, the tasks or actions do not effectively share the same "brain channel". Non-trivial tasks require the use of the same "brain channel" and therefore can not be multi-tasked efficiently.

There is a finite amount of capacity in your brain, dividing this capacity will issue its own penalty in time and effectiveness. Chronic multitaskers typically believe that tasks take longer than necessary. Multitaskers are more prone to committing mistakes than non-multitaskers. Mutltasking also often experience more life-reducing, and happiness-reducing stress.

Distraction is natural. Don't feel bad about being distracted but learn to control those distractions. Distraction undermines results. Figure out what matters most in the moment and give it your undivided attention.

**Lie No. 2 - A Disciplined Life**

> Success is actually a short race- a sprint fueled by discipline just long enough for habit to kick in and take over.

This is a relatively controversial point in comparison to the previous "lies". Rather than becoming a rigid and disciplined person, use selective discipline to establish a new habit.

> The trick to success is to choose the right habit and bring just enough discipline to establish it.

The book presents that it takes roughly 66 days (with values ranging from 18 to 254 days) to establish a habit. This is contrary to the typically cited 21 days.

Build one habit at a time. Success is sequential. Successful people use selected discipline to develop a few significant habits. One at a time. Over time.

**Lie No. 3 - Willpower Is Always On Will-Call**

Not unlike a muscle, Willpower is like a muscle, it can fatigue if it's recruited too much. Most people discover that sometimes you can generate the power of your will and other times you can't seem to find the same power.

Think of willpower as a cellphone battery, every day starts with a full charge that gradually losing charge with each demand throughout the day until the battery is exhausted. The more we use our minds, the less minding power we have.

Nutritional supplementation such as eating nutrient-rich food can recharge this willpower "battery". Complex carbohydrates are ideal for providing energy evenly throughout the day.

When the willpower muscle (or the brain's capability) has been exhausted, most individual fall back to a baseline default judgement. This lazier approach to decision making can be costly impair your working efficiency.

Given the nature of willpower, it is ideal to work through your most prioritized task, you ONE Thing during your peak willpower periods. You need to pay attention to your willpower to determine when these peak periods begin (typically following breaks and eating periods).

It is recommended that you do your most important (i.e., ONE Thing) early, when your willpower levels are typically the highest.

**Lie No. 4 - A Balanced Life**

Work-life Balance has been a myth perpetuated through the past few decades, beginning in earnest in the 1980s. Interest in the topic has continuously ramped up since then.

Living in the middle, the balance point, prevents you from making extraordinary time commitments to anything.

> In your effort to attend to all things, everything gets shortchanged.

Rather, you should know when to dwell in the middle and when to live out in the extremes (this concept also comes into play later one when discussing time blocks).

Time waits for no one, when you gamble with your time, you may be placing a bet you can't cover.

The book proposes the idea of counterbalancing, balancing between work and personal life and balancing within each.

In your professional life, focused time is the key. In your personal life, awareness is the essential ingredient.

Imagine your professional life and personal life as two distinct buckets for counterbalance purposes.

With work, you must identify what matters most and take that ONE Thing to the extreme, other obligations fall where they may.

With personal life, there are multiple areas that require a minimum amount of attention for you to feel that you have a life. You

must never go too long or too far without counterbalancing them so they are all active areas of your life.

**Lie No. 5 - Big is Bad**

> No one knows their ultimate ceiling.

Sabeer Bhatia went from only having $250 in his pocket to developing Hotmail which was eventually sold for $400 million.

> The only actions that become springboards to succeeding big are those informed by big thinking to begin with.

What you do in the time you work determines what you achieve. What you think, the size of your box determines your actions.

> The rung of a ladder was never meant to rest upon, but only to hold a man's foot long enough to enable him to put the other somewhat higher.

Avoid incremental thinking that asks, "What do I do next?" A good rule of thumb is to set a goal far above what your want that you'll be building a plan that practically guarantees your previous goal.

Big thoughts go nowhere without bold action. Once you've asked a big question, pause to imagine what life looks like with the answer.

If you have trouble envisioning this life, study the models, systems, habits, and relationships of other people who have found the answer.

Don't fear failure. It's as much a part of your journey to extraordinary results as success. Adopt a growth mindset. Extraordinary results are build on both extraordinary results AND failure.

When you fail, stop and ask yourself what you need to do to succeed.

Don't let small thinking cut your life down to size.

**The Focusing Question**

> The secret of getting ahead is getting started. The secret to getting started is breaking your complex overwhelming tasks into small manageable tasks and then starting on the first one.

>The journey of a thousand miles must begin with a single step.

The wrong first step could result in you ending up two thousand miles from where you want to be. Therefore, the Focusing Question is a way to recognize the ONE Thing to concentrate your efforts on. It helps keep your first step from being a misstep.

>The quality of any answer is directly determined by the quality of answer." Ask the most powerful question can result in a life-altering answer.

>...any wage I had asked of Life, Life would have willingly paid."

**The Focusing Question:** What's the ONE Thing I can do such that by doing it everything else will be easier or unnecessary?

This Focusing Question can address both "big picture" questions such as "Where am I going?" and "small focus" questions such as "What must I do right now to be on the path to getting to the "big picture"? Where's the bull's eye?"

**What's the one thing I can do...**

This promotes focused action, narrowing your efforts to "one thing". The "can do" commands you to take action that is possible at that moment.

**...Such That By Doing It...**

This section provides purpose to your actionable one thing.

**...Everything Else Becomes Easier or Unnecessary**

When you do this one thing, everything else you could do to accomplish your goal becomes either doable with less effort or no longer necessary. This elevates the answer to decluttering your life and removing any potential distractions.

The **Big-Picture Question** such as "*What is my ONE Thing*" can be used to develop a vision for your life, career, or company. Your strategic compass.

The **Small-Focus Question** such as "*What's my ONE Thing right now?*". Use when first waking to keep you focused on your most important work. It helps you focus on the first domino, focused on your most immediate needs.

**The Success Habit**

Build a habit by applying the **Focusing Question** on situations where the outcome absolutely matters. To avoid driving yourself crazy by over-analyzing every action, start with the big stuff and see where that takes you.

Apply the Focusing Question to every aspect of your life, your spiritual life, physical health, personal life, key relationships, job, business, and financial life.

You can also add the qualifier to the Focusing Question to specify a time frame such a "*right now*" or "*this year*", "*in five years*" and "*someday*".

**Some example questions for each area:**

**Spiritual Life**
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to help others?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to improve my relationship with God?

**For My Physical Health**
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to achieve my diet goals?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to ensure that I have exercise?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to relieve my stress.
   
**For My Personal Life**
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to improve my skill at ___
-   What's the One Thing I can do to find time for myself?
  
**For My Key Relationships**
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to improve my relationship with my spouse/partner?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to improve my children's school performance?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to show my appreciation for my parents?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to make my family stronger?
   
**For My Job**
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to ensure that I hit my goals?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to improve my skills?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to help my team succeed?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to further my career?
   
**For My Business**
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to make use more competitive?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to make our product the best?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to make us more profitable?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to improve our customer experience?
    
**For My Finances**
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to increase my net worth?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to improve my investment cash flow?
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do to eliminate my credit card debt?
   
**The Path To Great Answers**

> You ask a great question, then you seek a great answer.

**1.  Ask a great a question.**
    
Great questions aim you at big, specific answers. Great questions are aimed to be measurable.

**Imagine four question categories:**

**Small & Specific**

*What can I do to increase sales by 5% this year?*

There's nothing particularly challenging about this question/or goal. It is a low goal, low goals don't require extraordinary actions so they rarely lead to extraordinary results.

**Small & Broad:**

*What can I do to increase sales?*

Not really an achievement question, more-so for brainstorming. Great for listing options but generally a very average question and therefore unlikely to lead to extraordinary actions and extraordinary results.

**Big & Broad**

*What can I do to double sales?*

A good start, a big question, but lacks any specifics (double sales in a year...twenty years?) There are too many options and not enough specifics to generate extraordinary actions.

**Big & Specific:**

*What can I do to double sales in six months?*

An example of a great question, it's a big goal and it's very specific. You'll have to stretch your mind and step outside of your standard toolbox of solutions to address it.

**Convert your Big & Specific question to a Focusing Question:**

What's the ONE Thing I can do to double sales in six months such that everything else will be easier or unnecessary?

**2.  Find A Great Answer**
   
Answers come in three categories:

**Doable**

Already within reach of your current knowledge, skills, and experience. You already know what to do and how to do it.

**Stretch**

Still within your reach but requires further research and study to come up with an answer. Potentially probable and achievable.
  
**Possibility**

The route of the high achiever. The Great Answer. Hardest to come by. Exists beyond what is already known and being done. Innovative.

You can discover this answer by studying and researching the lives of other high achievers.

> A new answer.

Your investigation begins with finding out what others have learned. Build your actions on the backs of the lessons of other high achievers.

> The research and experience of others is the best place to start when looking for your answer.

First you establish a benchmark based on this gained knowledge, then looking toward trends to determine among-st of a pool of possibilities your next step.

**Extraordinary Results**

Purpose, priority, and productivity.

Your big ONE Thing is your purpose, your small ONE Thing is your priority. Productive people start with purpose and use it as a guiding force in determining priority that drives their actions. This is the path to extraordinary results.

What you see is determined by what you don't. Profit, productivity, and priority is determined by purpose.

The more productive people are, the more purpose and priority are pushing them and driving them. In business terms, the most visible is the productivity and profit.

> Great businesses are built one productive person at a time.

**Live With Purpose**

In the Christmas Carol, Scrooge's purpose and priority focused on making as much money for himself as he can; therefore his productivity is always aimed in that direction. After the events of the night, Scrooge's purpose changes to helping people and his priorities and actions change accordingly. This demonstrates the remarkable trans-formative power of a new purpose.


> Who we are and where we want to go determine what we do and what we accomplish.

We must make sure that our purpose in life isn't a bottomless pit of desire, constantly looking for the next thing to make us happy.

Having money and things won't automatically lead to lasting happiness.

> Happiness happens on the way to fulfillment.

Happiness is found when you make your life about achieving something bigger.

> Financially wealthy people are those who have enough money coming in without having to work to finance their purpose in life.

When you have a clear purpose in life, clarity in situations becomes easier to obtain. Decisions are easier and faster to make.

Purpose also helps when things don't go your way.

What is your Big Why? What drives you? What gets you up in the morning? What keeps you going when you're worn down and tired? Why are you excited about life?

If you don't have an answer, try writing down something you'd like to accomplish and then describe how you'd do it. Pick a direction and start marching down that path, and see how you like it. Time brings clarity.

**Live By Priority**

> Purpose without priority is powerless.

In the current moment, you can only have one real priority which can be derived from the pattern below.

**Goal Setting to the Now**

**Someday Goal**
-   What's the ONE Thing that I want to do someday?
    
**Five-Year Goal**
-   Based on my Someday Goal
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do in the next Five Years?
    
**One-Year Goal**
-   Based on your Five Year Goal
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do in the next Year?
    
**Monthly Goal**
-   Based on your One Year Goal
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do this month?
    
**Weekly Goal**
-   Based on your Monthly Goal
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do this week?
    
**Daily Goal**
-   Based on your Weekly Goal
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do today?
    
**Right Now**
-   Based on your Daily Goal
-   What's the ONE Thing I can do right now?
    
Train your mind to think in the above pattern, connecting your current priority, the most important action right now, to your long term goals. You can not skip steps in the about pattern.

The above pattern is similar to the dominoes analogy at the beginning of the book.

Write down your goals and keep them close.

Live For Productivity

> Productive action transforms lives.

> Putting together a life of extraordinary results simply comes down to getting the most out of what you do, when what you do matters.

Productive people get more done, achieve better results, and earn far more in their hours because they devote maximum time to being productive on their top priority, their ONE Thing.

They devote this time by utilizing the concept of Time Blocking. They time block for their ONE Thing and they protect their time blocks from other distractions.

Time blocking is a very results-oriented way of viewing and using time. 

> It's a way of making sure that what has to be done gets done.

To determine your blocked time, ask the Focusing Question. Make an appointment with yourself to tackle your ONE Thing.

**Time Block these three things:**

**Time Block Your Time Off**
Most successful people see themselves working between vacations. Resting is as important as working.

**Time Block Your One Thing**
This is your most important work. It comes second only to the above. The most productive people design their days around doing their ONE Thing. If they complete their ONE Thing before the time block is done, they use the Focusing Question to determine how to use their remaining time. If they have a specific goal for their ONE Thing, they finish it regardless of time.

The key to making this work is to block time as early in your day as possible. The book recommends blocking a minimum four hours a day. Be a Maker in the morning and a Manager in the afternoon.

**Time Block Your Planning Time**
> Block an hour each week to review your annual and monthly goals.

**Four proven ways to protect your Time Block**

1.  Build a bunker Find a place to work where you can easily avoid any disruption, distraction, or interruption.
    
2.  Store Provisions Have any supplies, materials, and snacks that you need on hand.
    
3.  Sweep for mines Turn off your phone, shut down your email. Your work deserves all of your focused attention.
    
4.  Enlist support Tell those most likely to see you out what you're doing and when you'll be available.
    

**The Three Commitments**

1.  **Follow the Path of Mastery**
> When you can see mastery as a path you go down instead of a destination you arrive at, it starts to feel accessible and attainable.

The book revisits the 10,000 hour rule that is often cited. Expertise tracks with hours invested. (Deliberate practice or continuously challenging yourself is also very important.)

> "If people knew how hard I had to work to gain my mastery, it wouldn't seem wonderful at all" - Michelangelo

The pursuit of mastery bears gifts. As you progress along, your self confidence and success competence will grow.

2.  **Move from "E" to "P"**

**E = Entrepreneurial** - Seeing something that we want to do or that needs to be done and racing off to do it with enthusiasm, energy, and our natural ability. The success of this approach is limited to your natural ability. This is called the OK Plateau.

**P = Purposeful** - Once you hit the ceiling of your natural ability, you look for new models and systems, better ways to do things to push through the boundary above "E"

Ask an "E" to cut some firewood and the "E" will likely shoulder an ax and head straight for the woods. A "P" will likely ask, "Where can I get a chainsaw?"

The "P" mindset is required for breakthroughs and accomplishing extraordinary results.

3.  **Live the Accountability Cycle.**
  
>Highly successful people are clear about their role in the events in their life.

Take ownership of your outcomes. Being a victim doesn't work, change only occurs when you're accountable. Stay in the driver's side.

Find a coach or mentor to help you stay accountable.

**The Four Thieves**

1.  **The Inability to Say "No".**
    
> When you say yes to something, it's imperative that you understand what you're saying no to.

You can't please everyone, so don't try.

> "You can say no with respect, you can say no promptly, and you can say no with a lead to someone who might say yes. But just saying yes because you can't bear the short-term pain of saying no is not going to help you do the work." - Seth Godin

A request must be connected to my ONE Thing for me to consider it.

2.  **Fear of Chaos**

Focusing on your ONE Thing can affect your life by moving other loose ends into a chaotic tangled mess. Learn to deal with it. Don't ignore focusing on your ONE Thing by avoiding the potential for chaos.

3.  **Poor Health Habits**
   
It's important to manage your energy so that you can do what you need to do, achieve what you want to achieve, and live the life that you want to live.

4.  **Poor Environment**
    
Make sure that the people around you and your physical surroundings is supportive of your goals.

**The Journey**

> "One step at a time." The one step is your ONE Thing.

Live a life worth living where, in the end, you'll be able to say "I'm glad I did" not "I wish I had."

> A life worth living might be measured in many ways but the one way that stands above all others is living a life of no regrets.

**The Five Most Common Regrets of the Dying**

1.  I wish that I'd let myself be happier.
2.  I wish I'd stay in touch with my friends.
3.  I wish I'd had the courage to express my feelings.
4.  I wish I hadn't work so hard.
5.  I wish I'd had the courage to live a life true to myself not the life others expected of me.
    
No regrets.

> "Only those who will risk going too far can possibly find out how far one can go." - T.S. Eliot

At any moment in time there can only be ONE Thing. Actions build on action, habits build on habit, success builds on success.

Big lives ride the powerful wave of chain reactions and are built sequentially, you can't simply skip to the end of the journey.

Have faith in your purpose and priorities that you'll seek out your ONE Thing. Faith ultimately leads to action.

> Success is an inside job.

Put yourself together and your world falls into place. When you bring purpose to your life, know your priorities, and achieve high productivity in what matters most every day, your life makes sense and the extraordinary becomes possible.

You are the first domino.